In this video,
we discuss data reduction and
unsupervised learning, which are two
essential concepts in cluster analysis.
A dataset is essentially a table where
the variables, which are also called
features or attributes, are in the columns
and the observations are in the rows.
This means that all the data values
are in the body of the table.
The process of reducing the number of
variables is known, as dimensionality
reduction, while grouping observations
is a form of data reduction.
Isolating the key variables in a dataset
is important in order to build robust,
predictive models.
It turns out that often,
there is some degree of redundancy
among the variables in a dataset.
And this is why it is possible to reduce
the number of dimensions without losing
critical information.
Redundancy occurs when different
attributes respond in similar ways to
some common underlying factor.
For instance, let's assume the human
resource department of a company
creates an instrument to
measure job satisfaction.
Employees are asked to rate seven
statements using a scale from
one to seven, where one means that they
strongly disagree with the statement and
seven means that they strongly agree.
Let's also assume that
the statements in this survey are.
My supervisor treats
me with consideration.
My supervisor consults me concerning
important decisions that affect my work.
My supervisor gives me recognition
when I do a good a job.
My supervisor gives me the support
I need to do my job well.
My pay is fair.
My pay is appropriate, given the amount
of responsibility that comes with my job.
My pay is comparable to the pay
earned by other employees
whose job are similar to mine.
Let's suppose that the HR department wants
to use the responses as seven separate
variables to predict intention to quit.
The problem with conducting this
study the way it is set up is
a redundancy in the predictive variables.
The seven items in the questionnaire
are not really measuring seven different
constructs.
More likely, items one to four are
measuring a single construct that could
be reasonably be labeled
satisfaction with supervision.
While items five to seven are measuring
a different construct that could be
label satisfaction with pay.
These constructs could be
identified with a technique called
principal component analysis or
PCA for short.
This technique creates
new variables as linear
combinations of the original variables.
These new variables are called
principal components.
In our job satisfaction example,
a principal component analysis
would identify two components.
PCA would transform the original
seven values into two scores,
one for each component.
We don't show how these
scores were calculated.
But for example, in this case,
the employee with ID 102274
seems to be more satisfied with
supervision than with pay.
Cluster analysis, on the other hand,
is a data reduction technique
in the sense that it can take
a large number of observations and
reduce them into a small
number of identifiable groups.
Each of these groups can be
interpreted more easily and
is represented by a centroid.
The scatter plot shows four clusters for
the scores in the job satisfaction survey.
The stars represent the centroid
of each cluster and
can be used to characterize all
the observations in the group.
For instance, the gray cluster consists of
employees with low job satisfaction and
is represented by average
scores close to two.
Cluster analysis can achieve
very significant data reductions
by transforming thousands or
even hundreds of thousands of
observations into interpretable groups.
Now, let's talk about the concept
of unsupervised learning.
You may recall that classification
techniques were discussed in the second
course of this special session.
In classification, the objective is to
find a set of rules that can be applied
to a new observation in order to assign
this new observation to a group.
The methods for
classification develop rules by
discovering patterns in historical data.
The critical feature of
this historical data is
that classification of
the observations is known and
it is used to learn how to
classify future observations.
Because this piece of
information is available,
the process is known as
supervised learning.
For instance, this table shows ten answers
to the job satisfaction survey and
it also indicates whether or
not the employee quit.
The two employees that quit had low
ratings for the salary questions five,
six and seven and some mixed ratings for
the supervisor questions one through four.
A prediction model built on this
data will fall in the category of
supervised learning,
because the outcome that
the model is trying to predict
is known in historical data.
In unsupervised learning, the observations
in the historical data are not labeled.
That is, we don't know if an observation
belongs to one group or another.
This means that we don't know how
many different groups there are in
a population from which
the dataset originated.
Discovering the number
of groups is therefore,
one of the main outcomes of the analysis.
For example, in a previous video,
we described how the market intelligence
firm, Information Resources Incorporated,
conducted a cluster analysis of survey
data to establish that the market of
natural and organic products
consisted of seven distinct segments,
a number that was not known prior
to the completion of the analysis.
Cluster analysis can also be applied
to historical data that is labeled
with the purpose of finding new labels.
For example, in one study,
cluster analysis was used to
categorize mutual funds based on
their financial characteristics instead
of their investment objectives.
The historical data for
the study consisted of 904 different
funds that fund managers had
classified into seven categories
according to the investment objectives.
That is the fund managers
assigned a label to each fund and
decided there were seven possible labels.
However, a cluster analysis on financial
variables related to the funds
concluded that there were only
three distinct fund categories.
The reduction in the number of
categories has significant benefits to
investors seeking to
diversify their portfolios.
The study determined that
the consolidated categories
were more informative
about performance and
risk than the original seven categories
created by the fund managers.
In terms of data to use, the analyst
initially considered 28 financial
variables that were related to risk and
return.
However, after applying principal
component analysis, they found that 16 out
of the 28 variables were able to explain
98% of the variation in the dataset.
Therefore, they only use 16 variables per
cluster which as we all ready mentioned,
resulted in three fund categories.
This example shows that
dimensionality reduction and
data reduction compliment each other.
As a matter fact, it is a common
practice to apply dimensionality
reduction techniques such
as PCA before clustering.